How do we understand other people’s behavior? How can we assign goals, intentions, or beliefs to the inhabitants of our social world? A possible way to answer these challenging questions is to adopt an evolutionary frame of reference, both in phylogenetical and ontogenetical terms, envisaging these ‘mind-reading’ capacities as rooted in antecedent, more ‘ancient’ and simple mechanisms.

This approach can capitalize on the results of different fields of
investigation: neurophysiology can investigate the neural correlates of precursors of these mechanisms in lower species of social primates such as macaque monkeys. Developmental psychology can study how the capacity to attribute propositional attitudes to others develops. In the present article we will propose that humans’
mind-reading abilities rely on the capacity to adopt a simulation routine. This capacity might have evolved from an action execution/observation matching system whose
neural correlate is represented by a class of neurons recently
discovered in the macaque monkey premotor cortex: mirror
neurons (MNs).

The macaque monkey premotor area F5 and mirror
neurons
Converging anatomical evidence (see Matelli and Luppino1
for review) supports the notion that the ventral premotor
cortex (referred to also as inferior area 6) is composed of two
distinct areas, designated as F4 and F5 (Ref. 2) (Fig. 1A). Area F5 occupies the most rostral part of inferior area 6, extending rostrally within the posterior bank of the inferior
limb of the arcuate sulcus. Area F5 is reciprocally connected
with the hand field of the primary motor cortex3–5 and has
direct, although limited, projections to the upper cervical
segments of the spinal cord6
. Microstimulation in F5 evokes
hand and mouth movements at thresholds generally higher
than in the primary motor cortex7,8.

The functional properties
of F5 neurons were assessed in a series of single unit recording experiments9–11. These experiments showed that the
activity of F5 neurons is correlated with specific hand and
mouth motor acts and not with the execution of individual
movements like contractions of individual muscle groups. What makes a movement into a motor act is the presence of
a goal. This distinction is very important since it allows one
to interpret the role of the motor system not just in terms of
the control of the dynamic variables of movement (like joint
torques, etc.), but rather as a possible candidate for the
instantiation of mental states such as purpose or intention. Using the effective motor act as the classification criterion,
the following types of neurons were described: ‘Grasping
neurons’, ‘Holding neurons’, ‘Tearing neurons’ and
‘Manipulation neurons’.

Grasping neurons discharge when
493
Mirror neurons and the
simulation theory of
mind-reading
Vittorio Gallese and Alvin Goldman
A new class of visuomotor neuron has been recently discovered in the monkey’s
premotor cortex: mirror neurons. These neurons respond both when a particular action
is performed by the recorded monkey and when the same action, performed by another
individual, is observed. Mirror neurons appear to form a cortical system matching
observation and execution of goal-related motor actions.

Experimental evidence
suggests that a similar matching system also exists in humans. What might be the
functional role of this matching system?

One possible function is to enable an organism
to detect certain mental states of observed conspecifics. This function might be part of,
or a precursor to, a more general mind-reading ability. Two different accounts of mindreading have been suggested. According to ‘theory theory’, mental states are
represented as inferred posits of a naive theory.

According to ‘simulation theory’, other
people’s mental states are represented by adopting their perspective: by tracking or
matching their states with resonant states of one’s own. The activity of mirror neurons,
and the fact that observers undergo motor facilitation in the same muscular groups as
those utilized by target agents, are findings that accord well with simulation theory but
would not be predicted by theory theory. V. Gallese is at the
Istituto di Fisiologia
Umana, Università
di Parma, Via
Volturno 39,
I-43100 Parma,
Italy. tel: +39 521 903879
fax: +39 521 903900
e-mail: fisioum@
symbolic.pr.it
A. Goldman is at the
Department of
Philosophy, University
of Arizona, Tucson,
AZ 85721-0027,
USA.

tel: +1 520 621 3120
fax:

+1 520 621 9559
e-mail: goldman@u.
arizona.edu
Gallese and Goldman – Mirror neurons and mind-reading Opinion
1364-6613/98/$ – see front matter © 1998 Elsevier Science.

All rights reserved. PII: S1364-6613(98)01262-5
Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 2, No. 12, December 1998
Opinion Gallese and Goldman – Mirror neurons and mind-reading
494
Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 2, No. 12, December 1998
VIP
AIP
LIP
PG
PF
F5
F4
F2 F7
A
46
F1
S1
PE
Fig.

1 Anatomical location and functional properties of mirror neurons.

(A) Lateral view of the macaque brain showing the cytoarchitectonic parcellation of
the agranular frontal cortex and of the posterior parietal cortex. Motor and premotor areas, indicated by the letter F, are defined according to Matelli et al.2 Mirror
neurons were all recorded from area F5 (shown in bold). (B) Visual and motor responses of a mirror neuron.

In the upper part of each panel the behavioral context
in which the neuron was studied is shown. In the lower part of each panel a series of consecutive rasters and the relative peristimulus response histograms are shown. In the upper panel the experimenter grasps a piece of food with his hand and moves it towards the monkey, who grasps it. The neuron discharges during grasping
observation, is silent when the food is moved, and discharges again when the monkey grasps it. In the middle panel the experimenter grasps the food with a tool.

Subsequent series of event as in the previous panel.

During grasping observation the neuron is silent. In the lower panel the monkey grasps the food in complete
darkness. In the upper and middle panels rasters and histograms are aligned (vertical bar) with the moment in which the experimenter grasps the food. In the lower
panel alignment is with the beginning of the grasping movement. (Histograms bin width, 20 ms. Ordinates, spikes/bin.

Abscissae, time.)

(C) Visual and motor responses of a mirror neuron.

In the upper panel the recorded monkey observes another monkey grasping food. In the middle panel the recorded monkey observes the
experimenter grasping food. In the lower panel the recorded monkey actively grasps food. Each panel illustrates five consecutive trials.

The spontaneous activity of
the neuron was virtually absent. (Panels B and C are modified from Ref. 15.) the monkey performs movements aimed to take possession
of objects with the hand (‘Grasping-with-the-hand neurons’), with the mouth (‘Grasping-with-the-mouth neurons’),
or with both.

Grasping-with-the-hand neurons form the
largest class of F5 neurons. Most neurons of this class are
selective for different types of grip. The role of these neurons has been conceptualized by Rizzolatti12 as a ‘motor
vocabulary’ of actions related to prehension. The study of F5 neurons’ responsiveness to visual stimuli led to the discovery of two distinct classes of neurons:
canonical neurons13, which are activated during observation
of graspable objects, and MNs (see Refs 14,15) which
discharge when the monkey observes another individual
performing an action. We will describe in more detail the
functional properties of this class of neurons.

Figure 1B and
C illustrate two examples of the activity of MNs. MNs respond both when a particular action is performed by the recorded monkey and when the same action
performed by another individual is observed. All MNs, as
mentioned above, discharge during specific goal-related
motor acts.

Grasping, manipulating and holding objects are
by far the most effective actions triggering their motor response. About half of them discharge during a specific type
of prehension, precision grip (prehension of small objects
by opposing the thumb and the index finger) being the
most common one. The most effective visual stimuli triggering MNs’ visual responses are actions in which the experimenter (Fig. 1B), or a second monkey (Fig. 1C), interacts with objects with their hand or with their mouth. Neither the sight of the object alone nor of the agent alone
is effective in evoking the neuronal response.

Mimicking
the action without a target object, or performing the action
by using tools (middle panel of Fig. 1B) is similarly ineffective. In over 90 percent of MNs a clear correlation between
the most effective observed action and their motor response
was observed. In many neurons this correlation was strict
both in terms of the general goal of the action (e.g. grasping) and in terms of the way in which it was executed (e.g.
precision grip)14,15. On the basis of their functional properties, here summarized, MNs appear to form a cortical system that
matches observation and execution of motor actions.

What
could be the possible functional role of this matching system? Before addressing this issue it is important to stress
that the existence of an equivalent system has also been
demonstrated in humans. The mirror system in humans
Two lines of evidence strongly suggest that an action/observation matching system similar to that discovered in monkeys also exists in humans. The first refers to an elegant
study by Fadiga et al.16 in which the excitability of the
motor cortex of normal human subjects was tested by using
Transcranic Magnetic Stimulation (TMS).

The basic assumption underlying this experiment was the following. If
the observation of actions activates the premotor cortex in
humans, as it does in monkeys, this mirror effect should
elicit an enhancement of the motor evoked potentials (MEPs)
induced by TMS of the motor cortex, given its strong
anatomical links to premotor areas. TMS was performed
during four different conditions: observation of an experimenter grasping objects; observation of an experimenter
doing aimless movements in the air with his arm; observation of objects; detection of the dimming of a small spot of
light. The results of this study showed that during grasping
observation MEPs recorded from the hand muscles
markedly increased with respect to the other conditions, including the attention-demanding dimming detection task.

Even more intriguing was the finding that the increase of
excitability was present only in those muscles that subjects
would use when actively performing the observed movements. This study provided for the first time evidence that
humans have a mirror system similar to that in monkeys. Every time we are looking at someone performing an action, the same motor circuits that are recruited when we
ourselves perform that action are concurrently activated.

These results posed the question of the anatomical location of the mirror system within the human brain. This
issue has been addressed by two brain-imaging experiments
utilizing the technique of Positron Emission Tomography
(PET) (Refs 17,18). These two experiments, although different in many respects, shared a condition in which normal
human subjects observed the experimenter grasping 3-D
objects.

Both studies used the observation of objects as a
control condition. The results showed that grasping observation significantly activates the cortex of the left superior
temporal sulcus (Brodmann’s area 21), of the left inferior
parietal lobule (Brodmann’s area 40) and of the anterior
part of Broca’s region (Brodmann’s area 45). The activation, during action observation, of a cortical sector of the
human brain traditionally linked with language raises the
problem of the possible homologies between Broca’s region
and the premotor area F5 of the monkey, in which MNs
have been discovered. This issue is outside the scope of the
present article and will not be dealt with here (for discussion,
see Ref. 19).

Mirror neurons and mind-reading
What is the function of the mirror system? One possible
function could be to promote learning by imitation. When
new motor skills are learned, one often spends the first
training phases trying to replicate the movements of an observed instructor. MNs could in principle facilitate that
kind of learning.

We do not favor this possible role of MNs,
at least in non-human primates (see Box 1). Here we explore another possibility: that MNs underlie the process of
‘mind-reading’, or serve as precursors to such a process. Mind-reading is the activity of representing specific
mental states of others, for example, their perceptions,
goals, beliefs, expectations, and the like.

It is now agreed
that all normal humans develop the capacity to represent
mental states in others, a system of representation often called
folk psychology. Whether non-human primates also deploy
folk psychology is more controversial (see last section of
this article), but it certainly has not been precluded. The
hypothesis explored here is that MNs are part of – albeit
perhaps a rudimentary part of – the folk psychologizing
mechanism. Like imitation learning, mind-reading could make a
contribution to inclusive fitness. Detecting another agent’s
Gallese and Goldman – Mirror neurons and mind-reading
495
Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 2, No. 12, December 1998
Opinion
goals and/or inner states can be useful to an observer because it helps him anticipate the agent’s future actions,
which might be cooperative, non-cooperative, or even
threatening.

Accurate understanding and anticipation enable the observer to adjust his responses appropriately. Our
discussion of mind-reading will initially and primarily focus
on humans; later we will return to its possible realization in
non-human primates. Two theories of mind-reading
There is a large literature concerned with the nature of
(human) mind-reading. Two types of approaches have
dominated recent discussion: theory theory (TT) and simulation theory (ST) (Refs 20–22).

The fundamental idea of
TT is that ordinary people accomplish mind-reading by acquiring and deploying a commonsense theory of the mind,
something akin to a scientific theory. Mental states attributed to other people are conceived of as unobservable, theoretical posits, invoked to explain and predict behavior in
the same fashion that physicists appeal to electrons and
quarks to predict and explain observable phenomena. On
the standard presentation, the theory of mind possessed by
ordinary people consists of a set of causal/explanatory laws
that relate external stimuli to certain inner states (e.g. perceptions), certain inner states (e.g. desires and beliefs) to
other inner states (e.g. decisions), and certain inner states
(e.g. decisions) to behavior.

This picture has been articulated by functionalist philosophers of mind23–26 as well as by
developmental psychologists27,28. According to TT, attributing particular mental states to others arises from theoretical
reasoning involving tacitly known causal laws. Much on this subject has been done by developmentalists, eager to determine how the mind-reading capacity is
acquired in childhood29. Many interpret children’s changes
in mind-reading skills as evidence in favor of TT because
the skill changes are construed as manifestations of changes
in theory30,31. Theory theorists differ among themselves as
to whether theory of mind is acquired by a general-purpose
scientizing algorithm32 or by the maturation of a domainspecific module or set of modules33,34.

This debate will not
concern us here. ST arose partly from doubts about whether folk
psychologizers really represent, even tacitly, the sorts of
causal/explanatory laws that TT typically posits. ST suggests that attributors use their own mental mechanisms to
calculate and predict the mental processes of others. For example, Kahneman and Tversky35 gave subjects a description
of two travellers who shared the same limousine en route to
the airport and were caught in a traffic jam.

Their planes
were scheduled to depart at the same time, but they arrived
30 minutes late. Mr A was told that his flight left on time;
Mr B was told that his flight was delayed and just left five
minutes ago. Who was more upset? Ninety-six percent of
the experimental subjects said that Mr B was more upset.

How did they arrive at this answer? According to TT there
must be some psychological law they exploited to infer the
travellers’ relative upsetness. According to ST, on the other
hand, each subject would have put himself in each of the
imaginary traveller’s ‘shoes’ and imagined how he would
have felt in their place36. Another example concerns the prediction of decisions.

To predict White’s next move in a
chess match ST suggests that you try to simulate White’s
thought processes and arrive at a decision which you then
attribute to him36–38. First you create in yourself pretend
desires, preferences, and beliefs of the sort you take White
to have; for example, preferences among chess strategies. These pretend preferences and beliefs are fed into your own
decision-making mechanism, which outputs a (pretend)
decision (see Fig. 2).

Instead of acting on that decision, it
is taken ‘off-line’ and used to predict White’s decision. Opinion Gallese and Goldman – Mirror neurons and mind-reading
496
Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 2, No. 12, December 1998
The ability of non-human primates to imitate the behavior of
conspecifics is a highly controversial issue. Tomasello et al.a
identify three strict criteria to delimit imitational learning:
(1) the imitated behavior should be novel for the imitator;
(2) it should reproduce the behavioral strategies of the model;
(3) it should share with it the same final goal. Behaviors not satisfying these criteria should not be considered as true imitational ones, and are rather to be explained by means of other
mechanisms such as stimulus enhancement, emulation, or response facilitation. By applying these strict criteria to the extant
literature, Tomasello et al.a exclude the possibility that wild
animals may display true imitative behavior.

A different perspective is offered by Byrne and Russonb
. These authors start from
the concept that behaviors display a hierarchical structure, and
can be therefore described at several levels of increasing complexity. Manual skills represents a good example. Because complex behaviors are hierarchically structured, ‘…there exists a
range of possibilities for how imitation might take place, beyond the simple dichotomy of imitation versus no imitation’.

Byrne and Russonb single out an action-level imitation in which
a detailed specification of the various motor sequences composing a complex action is made, and a program-level imitation in
which the broader, more highly structured component of a complex skill is retained, with subjective solutions to the low-level
specifications. Byrne and Russonb conclude that imitational
learning in non-human primates might have been overlooked
by the exclusive application of the action-level strategy as the
defining criterion. What is the relevance of MNs for imitation in non-human
primates?

First of all, it should be stressed that imitation behavior has never been observed in association with MN activity. Furthermore, even adopting Byrne and Russon’s criteria, we are
not aware of any clearcut evidence of imitation of grasping behavior among adult macaque monkeys, although this possibility
is not precluded for young monkeys during development. On
the basis of these considerations we are inclined not to favor the
hypothesis that MNs in area F5 promote grasping imitation
learning in adult monkeys.
References
a Tomasello, M., Kruger, A.C. and Ratner, H.H. (1993) Cultural
learning Behav.

Brain Sci. 16, 495–511
b Byrne, R.W. and Russon, A.E. Learning by imitation: a hierarchical
approach Behav.

Brain Sci.

(in press)
Box 1.

Mirror neurons and imitation

According to this simulation account,
you need not know or utilize any psychological laws. If simulation is going to make accurate predictions of targets’ decisions, pretend desires and beliefs must be sufficiently similar to genuine desires and
beliefs that the decision-making system
operates on them the same way as it operates on genuine desires and beliefs. Are
pretend states really similar enough to
the genuine articles that this will happen?
Homologies between pretend and natural (i.e. non-pretend) mental states are
well documented in the domains of visual and motor imagery39–43. (We assume
here that visual and motor imaging
consist, respectively, in pretending to see
and pretending to do; see Currie and
Ravenscroft44.) These visual and motor
homologies do not show, of course, that
other pretend mental states, for example,
desires and beliefs, also functionally
resemble their natural counterparts, but
informal evidence suggests this (see
Goldman45).

The difference between TT and ST
The core difference between TT and ST,
in our view, is that TT depicts mindreading as a thoroughly ‘detached’ theoretical activity, whereas ST depicts mindreading as incorporating an attempt to
replicate, mimic, or impersonate the mental life of the target
agent46. This difference can be highlighted diagrammatically,
as shown in Fig. 3.
In the simulation scenario there is a distinctive matching or ‘correspondence’ between the mental activity of the
simulator and the target. This is highlighted by the similar
state-sequences the two undergo (Fig. 3, A and B), the only
exception being that the simulator uses pretend states rather
than natural states.

The attributor in the TT scenario (Fig.
3C) does not utilize any pretend states that mimic those of
the target; nor does he utilize his own decision-making system to arrive at a prediction. Thus, ST hypothesizes that a
significant portion of mind-reading episodes involves the
process of mimicking (or trying to mimic) the mental activity of the target agent. TT predicts no such mimicking as
part of the mind-reading process.

This contrast presents a
potential basis for empirically discriminating between ST
and TT. If there is evidence of mental mimicry in the mindreading process, that would comport nicely with ST and
would not be predicted by TT. Before turning to such evidence, however, we should
note that simulation can be used to retrodict as well as predict mental states, that is, to determine what mental states
of a target have already occurred. Figure 4 depicts a retrodictive use of simulation. The attributor starts with the
question, ‘What goal did the target have that led him to perform action m?’

He conjectures that it was goal g, and tries
out this conjecture by pretending to have g as well as certain
beliefs about the effectiveness or ineffectiveness of the action
m vis-à-vis goal g. This simulation leads him to form a (pretend) decision to do m. He therefore uses this result to conclude that the target did indeed have goal g. In this fashion,
the attributor ultimately makes a ‘backward’ inference from
the observed action to a hypothesized goal state. Mirror neurons and simulation

In a similar fashion, it is conceivable that externally-generated MN activity serves the purpose of ‘retrodicting’ the target’s mental state, moving backwards from the observed
action. Let us interpret internally generated activation in
MNs as constituting a plan to execute a certain action, for
example, the action of holding a certain object, grasping it,
or manipulating it. When the same MNs are externally activated – by observing a target agent execute the same action
– MN activation still constitutes a plan to execute this action.

But in the latter case the subject of the MN activity
knows (visually) that the observed target is concurrently
performing this very action.

So we assume that he ‘tags’ the
plan in question as belonging to that target. In fact, externally generated MN activity does not normally produce
motor execution of the plan in question. Externally generated plans are largely inhibited, or taken ‘off-line’, precisely
as ST postulates. Thus MN activity seems to be nature’s
way of getting the observer into the same ‘mental shoes’ as
Gallese and Goldman – Mirror neurons and mind-reading
497
Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 2, No. 12, December 1998
Opinion
Perceptual
processes
Inference
mechanisms
Beliefs Desires
Decision-making
(practical reasoning)
system
Behavior-predicting
and -explaining system
‘Pretend’ belief and
desire generator
Body monitoring
system
Action control
system
Behavior
Fig. 2

The basic elements of the simulation routine.

Cognitive steps in predicting or explaining someone’s
decision by means of simulation are shown in the lower part of the figure. A dedicated pretend-state generator
generates pretend beliefs and desires suited to the target agent. These pretend beliefs and desires are fed into
the attributor’s decision-making system (the same system that normally operates on natural, non-pretend beliefs
and desires). The output of the decision-making system is taken ‘off-line’.

That is, instead of being fed into the
action control system, the output decision is sent to the behavior-predicting and -explaining system, which
outputs a prediction that the target will make that very decision. (Modified from Ref. 59.)

the target – exactly what the conjectured simulation heuristic aims to do. Although we compare externally generated MN activity
with what transpires in Fig. 4, there clearly are differences.

One difference is that the real attributor does not go back to
a distal goal or set of beliefs. He only goes back to a motoric
plan. Still, this seems to be a ‘primitive’ use of simulation
with the same structure as that depicted in Fig. 4.

It also
bears a resemblance to the motor theory of speech perception advocated by Liberman47, in which
the common link between the sender and
the receiver is not sound but the neural
mechanism, shared by both, allowing the
production of phonetic gestures. A proponent of TT might say that
TT also has ways of accounting for retrodictive attributions of mental states. Is it
clear that anything similar to simulation
occurs in externally generated MN activity?

The point is that MN activity is
not mere theoretical inference. It creates
in the observer a state that matches that
of the target. This is how it resembles the
simulation heuristic. Nothing about TT
leads us to expect this kind of matching.

It should be emphasized that the hypothesis being advanced here is not that MNs
themselves constitute a full-scale realization of the simulation heuristic. In particular, we do not make this conjecture
for MNs in monkeys. Our conjecture is
only that MNs represent a primitive
version, or possibly a precursor in phylogeny, of a simulation heuristic that
might underlie mind-reading. A further link between mirror
neuron activity and simulation can be
inferred from the fact that, as the TMS
experiment by Fadiga et al.16 demonstrates, the human equivalent matching
system facilitates in the observer the same
muscle groups as those utilized by the
target.

This supports the idea that even
when one is observing the action of another, one undergoes a neural event that
is qualitatively the same as an event that
triggers actual movement in the observed
agent. It is as if the tracking process in the observer is not
taken entirely off-line. This might appear to be a violation
of ST, but actually it is wholly within ST’s spirit. ST
postulates mental occurrences in the mind-reader that are
analogous to mental occurrences in the target, so it is not
surprising that downstream motor activity is not entirely inhibited.

If TT were correct, and an observer represents a target’s behavior in purely theoretical fashion, it would not be
predicted that the same muscle groups would be facilitated
in the observer as in the target. But if ST
were correct, and a mind-reader represents an actor’s behavior by recreating in
himself the plans or movement intentions of the actor, then it is reasonable to
predict that the same muscular activation
will occur in the mind-reader.

As matching muscular activation is actually observed in the observer, this lends support
to ST as opposed to TT. Clinical evidence of a similar phenomenon is found in so-called ‘imitation
behavior’48. A group of patients with
Opinion Gallese and Goldman – Mirror neurons and mind-reading
498
Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 2, No. 12, December 1998
Theoretical
reasoning
system
T will
decide
to do m
T desires g
Decision-making law
T believes (m g)
C
Decision
making
system
T will
decide
to do m
m
g
m g
T
T
B
T
Decision
making
system
m
g
m g
A
Fig.

3 Two possible ways of predicting someone’s decision. (A) A simple decision by an agent.

His desire
for goal g and belief that action m would be a good means to g are fed into his decision-making system, which
outputs a decision to perform m. (B) shows how an attributor can successfully predict this agent’s decision using
a simulation routine. After learning of the target’s (T) desire and belief (for example, from previous applications
of the simulation routine), the attributor creates similar pretend states in himself. These states are ‘tagged’ as belonging to the target, and then fed into the attributor’s decision-making system, which outputs a (pretend) decision to do m.

The attributor takes this decision ‘off-line’ and predicts that the target will decide to do m. (C) represents the way an attributor might predict the target’s decision using theoretical reasoning. The attributor starts
with knowledge that the target has a desire for goal g and a belief that m would achieve g. He also believes some
psychological law about human decision-making. These beliefs are all fed into his own theoretical-reasoning system, which outputs the belief that the target will decide to do m. Squares represent desires; ellipses represent beliefs; diamonds represent decisions; and hexagons represent cognitive mechanisms. Shading indicates that the
mental state is a pretend state.

Decision
making
system
What goal
did T have
that led him
to do m? T had
m goal g
g
m g
T
T
T
Fig. 4 A retrodictive use of simulation.

After observing the target agent (T) perform action m, the attributor
uses simulation to test whether goal g would have fitted with the choice of m. Goal g is re-created and fed into
his decision-making system, which does output m.
prefrontal lesions compulsively imitate gestures or even
complex actions performed in front of them by an experimenter. This behavior is explained as an impairment of the
inhibitory control normally governing motor schemas, or
plans. It may be inferred from this that normal humans,
when observing someone else perform an action, generate a
plan to do the same action, or an image of doing it, themselves.

Normally this plan is inhibited so that it does not
yield motor output, but such inhibition is impaired in the
patient population in question48. Non-human primates: behaviorists or mind-readers?

A mind-reading capacity for non-human primates is a hotly
debated issue among primatologists and behavioral scientists. In a recent paper Heyes49 argued that a survey of empirical
studies of imitation, self-recognition, social relationships,
deception, role-taking and perspective-taking fails to support
the theory of mind hypothesis over non-mentalist alternatives. Although, for sake of concision, it is not possible here
to address this issue thoroughly (for reviews see Refs 49 and
50), a few points are worth making.

Let us consider first the social nature of non-human primates. Social organization is by no means a distinctive feature of primates: within the realm of insects several species
(ants are one example) are endowed with a clear social structure. The distinctive hallmark of the social organization of
non-human primates is its sophisticated complexity.

Nonhuman primates live in groups that can comprise as many as
100 individuals. These groups are characterized by intense
and diversified types of social interactions51. Within such a
complex and hierarchically organized social structure, individuals are able to recognize kinship, hierarchical ranks, to
discriminate allies from enemies.

Stammbach52 showed that
dominant macaque monkeys modified their social relationships with lower-ranking individuals who had previously
learned how to retrieve food by pressing a lever. Dominant
individuals started grooming the low-ranking ones more
often than before, once they ‘understood’ that the newly acquired skills of the low-ranking individuals could be more
easily triggered, and therefore exploited, by using this sort of
social upgrading. All these examples, although not providing conclusive evidence of mind-reading abilities, nevertheless, in our view, provide a strong argument supporting the
hypothesis that non-human primates are endowed with
cognitive abilities that cannot be easily dismissed as the result of simple stimulus–response operant conditioning.
Being a ‘cognizer’, nevertheless, does not necessarily imply
being a mind-reader, or a possessor of the ability to detect
intentional states in others.

The argument that seems to
suggest the presence, in non-human primates, of elementary
forms of mind-reading abilities comes from the discovery
of deceptive behavior. In a series of field experiments,
Hauser53,54 showed that rhesus monkeys can withhold information about food location in order to deceive conspecifics and obtain more food for themselves. Deception is
particularly relevant here, since deceptive behavior calls for
the existence of second-order intentionality, and therefore
for the capability to attribute mental states to conspecifics. Gallese and Goldman – Mirror neurons and mind-reading
499
Trends in Cognitive Sciences – Vol. 2, No. 12, December 1998
Opinion
Neurons responding to complex biological stimuli have been
previously described in the macaque brain.

A series of studies
showed that in the inferior temporal cortex there are neurons
that discharge selectively to the presentation of faces or handsa–c.
More recently it has been shown that some of these neurons respond to specific features of these stimulid
. Neurons responding
to complex biological visual stimuli such as walking or climbing
were reported also in the amygdalae
. Even more relevant to the
issues addressed in the present paper is the work of Perrett and
co-workersb,f,g. These authors showed that in the cortex buried
within the superior temporal sulcus (STS) there are neurons selective to the observation of hand movements. These properties
resemble the visual properties of F5 MNs very closely: both
populations of neurons code the same types of actions; they
both generalize their responses to the different instances of the
same action; they both are not responsive to mimicked hand actions without the target object.

However, the unique feature of
F5 MNs resides in the fact that they also discharge during active
movements of the observer.

An observed action produces the
same neural pattern of activation as does the action actively
made by the observer. The presence of two brain regions with neurons endowed
with similar complex visual properties raises the question of their
possible relationship. Two possibilities might be suggested. One is that F5 MNs and STS neurons have different functional
roles: STS neurons would code the semantic properties, the
meaning, of hand–object interactions, while F5 MNs would be
engaged in the pragmatic coding of the same actions.

A second
possibility, that we favor, is that these two ‘action detector’ systems could represent distinct stages of the same analysis. The
STS neurons would provide an initial ‘pictorial’ description of
actions that would be then fed (most likely through an intermediate step in the posterior parietal cortex) to the F5 motor
vocabulary where it would acquire a meaning for the individual. The latter hypothesis stresses the role of action in providing
meaning to what is perceived. References
a Gross, C.G. et al.

(1972) Visual properties of neurons in
inferotemporal cortex of the monkey J. Neurophysiol.

35, 96–111
b Perrett, D.I., Rolls, E.T. and Caan, W. (1982) Visual neurones
responsive to faces in the monkey temporal cortex Exp.

Brain Res.
47, 329–342
c Gross, C.G. et al.

(1985)

Inferior temporal cortex and pattern
recognition, in Pattern Recognition Mechanisms (Chagas, C.,
Gattass, R. and Gross, C., eds), Springer-Verlag
d Tanaka, K. et al. (1991)

Coding visual images of objects in the
inferotemporal cortex of the macaque monkey J. Neurophysiol.
66, 170–189
e Brothers, L., Ring, B. and Kling, A. (1990) Response of neurons in
the macaque amygdala to complex social stimuli Behav.

Brain Res.
41, 199–213
f Perrett, D.I. (1989)

Frameworks of analysis for the neural
representation of animate objects and actions J. Exp.

Biol.

146,
87–113
g Perrett, D.I. (1990)

Understanding the visual appearance and
consequence of hand actions, in Vision and Action: the Control of
Grasping (Goodale, M.A., ed.), pp. 163–180, Ablex
Box 2.

Neural coding of complex biological stimuli
The relevance of the data on deceptive behavior has
been questioned on the basis of two main arguments. First,
field reports of ethologists are anecdotal and therefore intrinsically ambiguous. Second, alternative non-mentalistic
explanations, such as chance behavior, associative learning,
and inferences about observable features of the situation
have been proposed as more parsimonious explanations of
deceptive behavior (see Heyes49). However, according to Byrne55, who surveyed the
literature thoroughly, there are at least 18 independent reports of intentional deception in non-human primates supporting the notion that they can represent the mental states
of other conspecifics.

On the basis of this evidence, Byrne
and Whiten56 suggested that primates act according to a
manipulative strategy very similar to that put forward in the
sixteenth century by Niccolò Machiavelli in his masterpiece
Il Principe57. Our speculative suggestion is that a ‘cognitive continuity’ exists within the domain of intentional-state attribution
from non-human primates to humans, and that MNs represent its neural correlate (see also Box 2). This continuity is
grounded in the ability of both human and non-human
primates to detect goals in the observed behavior of conspecifics. The capacity to understand action goals, already
present in non-human primates, relies on a process that
matches the observed behavior to the action plans of the observer.

It is true, as pointed out by Meltzoff and Moore58,
that the understanding of action goals does not imply a full
grasp of mental states such as beliefs or desires. Action-goal
understanding nevertheless constitutes a necessary phylogenetical stage within the evolutionary path leading to the
fully developed mind-reading abilities of human beings.